# mentalhealthlockdowns
**Evaluating the Impact of Lockdowns on Mental Health: A Data Science Approach**

Proposal for the Guelph-Humber Research Fund
FUNDED: March 2022 - February 2023 

**Abstract**
In attempts to reduce the spread of the contagious SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes the COVID-19 disease, severe lockdown measures have been implemented by many governments globally restricting people’s movement and physical distance from each other. The severity of these lockdown measures has varied across and within countries, and over time, as the pandemic continues. Although the intended purpose of the lockdowns was to reduce the spread of the virus, there have also been unintended consequences, including an impact on mental health. For this study, we will investigate whether the severity of the lockdowns can predict several mental health outcomes, specifically within Canadians. 

**Significance of the Study**
  The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in unprecedented global lockdown measures and restrictions to most people's lives in order to reduce the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease, COVID-19. At present (January 2022), most countries have experienced waves of varying severities of lockdown measures in response to the virus. These lockdowns, and the government responses that dictated them, have been, and continue to be, tracked and quantified in the Global Stringency Index (Hale, Webster, Petherick, Phillips, & Beatriz, 2020), an index developed by researchers at Oxford University using the Oxford Universities’ COVID-19 Government Response Tracker. The Stringency Index comprises eight indicators, including school closures, workplace closures, the cancellation of public events, restrictions on size of gathering, closing public transport, stay-at-home requirements, restrictions on internal movement, and restrictions on international travel. The Stringency Index is currently available as open data for research for the purposes of COVID-19 research and has been used in several studies to date (e.g., Andika, Waluandara, & Halide, 2021; Hensel, Witte, Caria, et al., 2022; Lucchini, Centellegher, Pappalardo, et al., 2021). 
     Although the lockdowns were specifically implemented to reduce the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus by restricting people’s geographical movement and physical proximity with others, there have been unintended consequences to these restrictions. Of particular interest here are the consequences on mental health. For example, a study published early in the pandemic (Wang et al., 2020) that included 1210 respondents from 194 cities in China, revealed that over half of respondents rated the psychological impact as moderate or severe, 16.5% reported moderate to severe depressive symptoms, and 28.8% reported moderate to severe anxiety symptoms. A study out of Germany by Arbruster and Klotzbucher (2020) reported a 20% increase in mental health helpline calls during the first week of the lockdown. There were also reports of the negative psychological effects of quarantine requirements in China resulting in recommendations for how to mitigate those negative effects while still prioritizing the need to reduce the spread of the virus (Brooks, Webster, Smith, et al., 2020). Later, Nochaiwong et al., (2021) reviewed the literature on mental health from January 2020 to June 2020, including studies from 32 countries totalling 398,771 participants, and concluded that global prevalence for depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress symptoms, psychological stress, and sleep problems was higher compared to before the pandemic. In January 2021, Lee, Lee, Kim, et al. (2021) employed a cross-sectional design to assess people's self-reported depression in South Korea, China, Japan, Philippines, Indonesia, Peru, Paraguay, Democratic Republic of Congo, and Ethiopia and used the stringency index, along with other questions related to participants' personal safety and hygiene practices to assess the degree of life restrictions. The results showed that depression was higher when together the stringency index score was high (i.e., greater restrictions), life expectancy was high, and when social capital (e.g., personal and family relationships, social networks, interpersonal trust, institutional trust, and civic and social participation) was high, suggesting that restrictions were more impactful on those who had more to lose by the restrictions. Voss, Pavio, and Delerue Matos (2021) investigated feelings of sadness/depression in over 20 000 older people in Europe and Israel and found that that mental health indicator was positively correlated with the severity of lockdowns. Despite all of this, not all reports showed a negative impact on mental health. For example, several studies indicated improvements in mental health that corresponded with lockdowns, however those were interpreted as the lockdowns reducing the anxiety associated with the COVID-19 disease (Chen, Ng, Hui et al., 2021, Lee, Lui, Chen-Li et al., 2021). 
  Clearly, our understanding of the effects of lockdowns on mental health is far from complete and deserve continued attention, particularly because the ongoing pandemic continues to provoke recurring lockdowns. At this point, the amount of time spent in a lockdown might be an important indicator of present-day mental health. Therefore, the main objective of this research is to examine the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown measures on mental health, specifically within Canada. The goal is to use regression analysis with the Stringency Index to predict changes in mental health over time and at present. 

**Research Methods, Objectives, Outcomes**
This data science project that will make use of the following open datasets available for COVID-19 research:

1) Canadian Provincial and Territorial Stringency Index. The Centre of Excellence on the Canadian Federation developed a Stringency Index for each Province and Territory in Canada based on the methodology of Oxford University’s COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, which uses 13 similar measures that relate specifically to Canada’s response according to each Province and Territory (Breton & Sim, 2021). The data are available to researchers. The measures and a visualization of the data is available here: https://centre.irpp.org/data/covid-19-provincial-policies/. These data will be used as the independent variable in a regression model. A cumulative stringency score will be computed across time as another independent variable.   
2) Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH). CAMH (via Methodify) surveyed Canadians during the pandemic starting in May 2020 and released this data as open data for research. The data include several mental health indicators, at 8 time points, with the most recent one released in October 2021 and more to follow. These data will serve as dependent variables.
3) Statistics Canada Mental Health Data Change. Statistics Canada collected mental health during the 2021 census including general mental health, mood disorders, life stress, and life satisfaction, which will be released in June 2022. These data will serve as dependent variables.

**Research Timeline**
May 2022 - We will begin to prepare the data sets (e.g., data cleaning and joining files). June - September 2022 - Continued work on the data and preliminary data exploration, planned analyses. October 2022 - March 2023 - prepare manuscript and submit for publication. Write grants for additional research funding, add additional stringency and mental health data to the data set as it becomes available. 
